


The firm's <b>profit</b>, which we denote by the Greek letter $\Pi$, is the difference between the <b>revenue</b> the firm obtains from selling its output, indicated as $R$, and the firm's cost:

<p><span style="color: Forestgreen;">
\(\begin{gathered}
 \Pi = R - C
\end{gathered}\)
</span></p>

In the previous section we learned how to compute the firm's costs. To compute its revenues, suppose that the firm wants to produce and sell $Q$ units of output.
<span class="marginnote">
We are assuming that the firm does not <i>price discriminate</i> (a practice that we will discuss later on, when talking about monopolistic markets), that is, the firm sells all units of output produced at the same price.
</span>
Let $P(Q)$ denote the <b>inverse demand function for the firm's product</b>, that is, the function specifying the unit price $P(Q)$ the firm must charge, in order to sell any given quantity $Q$ of output. The firm's revenue is then
<p><span style="color: Darkgreen;">
\(\begin{gathered}
 R = P(Q) \times Q
\end{gathered}\)
</span></p>
What is the shape of the revenue function? This depends on the shape of the inverse demand for the firm's product. For a price-taking firm, namely a firm that can sell any quantity it wants at the market price, but nothing at a higher price, inverse demand is a horizontal line. In other words, $P(Q)$ is a constant function. This implies that a price-taker firm's revenue is a straight line with slope equal to $P$. 

<a id="gr_firm/RR1"></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/firm/gr_RR1" %}









































<h2>Short Run and Long Run</h2>

Now that we know how to compute a firm's cost and revenue, we are ready to tackle the firm's problem, namely maximization of its profit. Before proceeding, we need a preliminary discussion. 

When we say that labor is the only input of a competitive firm, what we mean is that labor is the only input that is variable in the <i>short run</i>. For example, in a few months our pasta maker is free to fire workers or hire new ones, but cannot as quickly get out of its business leasing contracts for premises, equipment, etc. Therefore, in the short run the firm's fixed cost is a <b>sunk cost</b>, i.e. a cost that the firm must pay even if it decides to produce zero output.

In a longer period of time,
<span class="marginnote">
Similarly, in the long run of a competitive market, firms that are not yet on the market can choose to enter the market.
</span>
though, say a few years, the firm is able to change also its fixed inputs, in the sense that it can choose to set them to zero by shutting down. Hence, in the <i>long run</i> the firm's fixed cost is not sunk. It is instead an <b>avoidable cost</b>, i.e. a cost that, much like variable cost, the firm does not pay if it chooses to shut down.

We shall see later that the distinction between short and long run has important consequences on the firm's decisions, in particulare on how the firm reacts to price changes in the output market.






















<h2>Optimal Choice in the Short Run</h2>

Most of a firm's production decisions are short-run decisions. As we have already argued, these decisions have no impact on the firm's fixed cost, since the latter is sunk in the short run. Thus, in order to identify its short-run optimal decision, the firm can, and indeed should, ignore the fixed cost, focusing exclusively on the only cost that is avoidable in the short run, namely the variable cost. Let us look at an example, based on the cost structure already used in <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/en/I/3/2#gr_firm/fromLtoCbis">Figure 3.8</a>, to illustrate our argument.

<a id="gr_firm/RC"></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/firm/gr_RC" %}




















<h2>Marginal Revenue, Marginal Cost, and Optimal Choice</h2>

How can we <i>compute</i> the firm's short-run optimal choice? To achieve this, it is convenient to reason in terms of marginal benefit and marginal cost. The firm finds it profitable to expand production, as long as the marginal benefit (the additional revenue) is at least as large as the marginal cost. 

Assuming that the firm's product is finely divisible, this implies choosing the output level at which <b>marginal revenue</b> equals marginal cost. Marginal revenue is the additional revenue deriving from the sale of the last, minimal quantity of output:

<p><span style="color: Darkgreen;">
\(\begin{gathered}
 MR = \frac{\Delta R}{ \Delta Q}  =  \frac{ R(Q) - R(Q-\Delta Q)    }{  \Delta Q   } 
\end{gathered}\)
</span></p>

When the firm's product is divisible, the marginal revenue function is simply the derivative of the revenue function. Hence, for a price-taking firm, marginal revenue is just the market price of the output, $P$, which the firm takes as given. In other words, the marginal revenue function $MR$ is constant: $MR=P$ for every quantity $Q$. We thus obtain the following <b>short-run profit-maximization rule of the price-taking firm</b>:

<p><span style="color: Blue;">
Choose the quantity of output $Q$ at which the equation $MC(Q) = P$ holds.
</span></p>

Taking again the cost structure of <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/en/I/3/2#gr_firm/fromLtoCbis">Figure 3.8</a>, later used also in <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/en/I/3/3#gr_firm/RC">Figure 8.3</a>, suppose that the production function is $Q=80\sqrt{L}$, the wage $W=64$, and the fixed cost $FC=100$. The total cost function is then $C=100+64Q^2/80^2$, so the marginal cost function is $MC=128Q/80^2=Q/50$. It follows that, given any output price $P$, the firm's optimal choice is the solution to the equation $Q/50=P$, that is, $Q=50P$. Thus, for example, if the price is $P=2$ then the optimal choice is $Q=100$, if the price is $P=3$ then the optimal choice is $Q=150$, and so on. In the next figure we illustrate graphically these calculations.

<a id="gr_firm/MRMC"></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/firm/gr_MRMC" %}



















<h2>Optimal Choice in the Long Run</h2>

Earlier in this section we pointed out that, in the long run, the firm's fixed cost becomes avoidable. Thus, in the long run, the firm can not only choose how much labor to hire, but also <i>whether</i> it should be present on the market and hence pay the fixed cost, or shut down and hence avoid it. The fact that, in the long run, avoiding the fixed cost is a possibility, makes the firm's long-run optimal choice different from its short-run optimal choice.

The long-run profit maximization rule can be stated by distinguishing three exhaustive and mutually exclusive cases:

<b>Case 1: Every positive quantity of output yields a negative profit, that is, $R(Q)<C(Q)$ for every $Q>0$.
</b>
<span style="color: Blue;">In this case, the long-run optimal choice is to shut down. Maximum profit is zero.</span>

<b>Case 2: There exists at least one positive quantity of output yielding a positive profit, that is, $R(Q)>C(Q)$ for some $Q>0$.</b>
<span style="color: Blue;">In this case, the optimal choice in the long run is the same as in the short run: produce the quantity of output at which marginal revenue equals marginal cost. Maximum profit is positive.</span>

<b>Case 3: There exist no positive quantity of output yielding a positive profit, but some positive quantity of output yields a profit of zero. That is, $R(Q)\leq C(Q)$ for every $Q>0$, but $R(Q)=C(Q)$ for some $Q>0$.</b>
<span style="color: Blue;">
In this case the firm is indifferent between shutting down and producing a positive quantity of output yielding zero profit. Both choices are optimal choices, and in both cases profit (which is the maximum profit) is zero.
</span>

Let us illustrate the rule in the following figure, based on the previous example.

<a id="gr_firm/RCLR"></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/firm/gr_RCLR" %}

How can we find out which of the three cases holds, and hence actually <i>compute</i> the firm's long-run optimal choice? For a price-taking firm (like the one in the figure above) there is an immediate way to do it. The fact that for a price-taking firm we have $R(Q)=PQ$ allows us to make three observations that will help us reformulate the three cases above in an equivalent but more useful way. The reformulation will be in terms of minimum average cost and efficient scale of production (concepts that we introduced in the <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/en/I/3/2#subsec_ACMIN">previous section</a>).

First, saying that $R(Q)<C(Q)$ for every $Q>0$ is the same as saying that $P<AC(Q)$ for every $Q>0$ (just divide both sides of the first inequality by $Q$ and you will immediately see why this is true). This is in turn equivalent to saying that $P<AC_{\text{min}}$.

Second, saying that $R(Q)>C(Q)$ for some $Q>0$ is the same as saying that $P>AC(Q)$ for some $Q>0$ (again, dividing both sides of the first inequality by $Q$ makes this obvious). This is in turn equivalent to saying that $P>AC_{\text{min}}$.

Third, saying that $R(Q)\leq C(Q)$ for every $Q>0$, but $R(Q)=C(Q)$ for some $Q>0$, is the same as saying that $P\leq AC(Q)$ for every $Q>0$, but $P=AC(Q)$ for some $Q>0$. Since the average cost function is U-shaped, this is in turn equivalent to saying that $P=AC_{\text{min}}$ and that, therefore, the only positive quantity of output at which $P=AC(Q)$ is the efficient scale of production, $Q=Q^{\text{eff}}$.

Given these observations, we can reformulate the price-taking firm's short-run profit maximization rule as follows:

<b>Case 1: The market price of output is smaller than the minimum average cost, $P<AC_{\text{min}}$.</b>
<span style="color: Blue;">In this case, the long-run optimal choice is shutting down. Maximum profit is zero.</span>

<b>Case 2: The market price of output is larger than the minimum average cost, $P>AC_{\text{min}}$.</b>
<span style="color: Blue;">In this case, the long-run optimal choice is the same as in the short run: produce the 
quantity of output such that $MC=P$. Maximum profit is positive.</span>

<b>Case 3: The market price of output equals the minimum average cost, $P=AC_{\text{min}}$.</b>
<span style="color: Blue;">
In this case the firm is indifferent between shutting down and producing its efficient scale of production, $Q=Q^{\text{eff}}$. Both choices are optimal, and in both cases the firm's profit (which is the maximum profit) is zero.
</span>

We illustrate this equivalent criterion in the following figure, again based on the data from the previous example.

<a id="gr_firm/PACLR"></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/firm/gr_PACLR" %}


















